All right.I’d like to thank you for leaving ‘crazy person’ out of the introduction.So I thought — I was trying to think what’s the most useful thing that I – what I can say that can actually be helpful and useful to you in the future.And I thought, perhaps tell the story of how I sort of came to be here.How did these things happen? And maybe there are lessons there. I often find myself wondering, how did this happen.When I was young, I didn’t really know what I was going to do when I got older. People kept asking me. But then eventually, I thought the idea of inventing things would be really cool.And the reason I thought that was because I read a quote from Arthur C. Clark which said that, “A sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.’ And that’s really true.If you go back say, 300 years, the things we take for granted today, you’d be burned at stake for. Being able to fly. That’s crazy. Being able to see over long distances, being able to communicate, having effectively with the Internet as a group mind of sorts, and having access to all the world’s information instantly from almost anywhere on the earth. This stuff that really would be magic – that would be considered magic in times past.In fact, I think it actually goes beyond that, there are many things that we take for granted today that weren’t even imagined in times past, that weren’t even in the realm of magic. So it actually goes beyond that. So I thought, well if I can do some of those things – basically if I can advance technology, then that is like magic and that would be really cool.I always had an existential crisis, because I was trying to figure out ‘what does it all mean?’ Like what’s the purpose of things? And I came to the conclusion that if we can advance the knowledge of the world, if we can do things that expand the scope and scale of consciousness, then we’re better able to ask the right questions and become more enlightened. And that’s the only way forward.So, I studied physics and business, because I figured in order to do a lot of these things you need to know how the universe works and you need to know how the economy works. And you also need to be able to bring a lot of people together to work with you to create something. Because it’s very difficult to do something as individuals if it’s a significant technology.So, I originally came out to California to try to figure out how to improve the energy density of electric vehicles – basically to try to figure out if there was an advanced capacitor that could serve as an alternative to batteries. And that was in 1995.That’s also when the Internet started to happen. And I thought well I could either pursue this technology, where success may not be one of the possible outcomes, which is always tricky, or participate in the Internet and be part of it. So, I decided to drop out.Fortunately, we’re past graduation, so, I can’t be accused of recommending that to you. And I did some Internet stuff, you know. I’ve done a few things here and there. One of which is PayPal.Maybe it’s helpful to say, one of the things that was important then in the creation of PayPal was how it started. Because initially – the initial thought with PayPal was to create a conglomeration of financial services, so if you have one place where all of your financial services needs could be seamlessly integrated and works smoothly.And we had a little feature, which was through e-mail payments.Whenever we’d show the system off to someone, we’d show the hard part, which was the conglomeration of financial services, which is quite difficult to put together. Nobody was interested.Then we showed people e-mail payments, which was quite easy and everybody was interested. So, I think it’s important to take feedback from your environment. You want to be as closed-loop as possible.So, we focused on e-mail payments and tried to make that work. And that’s what really got things to take off. But, if we hadn’t responded to what people said, then we probably would not have been successful. So, it’s important to look for things like that and focus on them when you seem them, and you correct your prior assumptions.Going from PayPal, I thought well, what are some of the other problems that are likely to most affect the future of humanity? It really wasn’t from the perspective of, ‘what’s the best way to make money,’ which is okay, but, it was really ‘what do I think is going to most affect the future of humanity.’So the biggest terrestrial problem we’ve got is sustainable energy. But the production and consumption of energy in a sustainable manner. If we don’t solve that in this century, we’re in deep trouble.And the other one being the extension of life beyond earth to make life multi-planetary. So that’s the basis for — the latter is the basis for SpaceX and the former is the basis for Tesla and SolarCity.When I started SpaceX, initially, I thought that well, there’s no way one could start a rocket company. I wasn’t that crazy. But, then, I thought, well, what is a way to increase NASA’s budget? That was actually my initial goal. I thought well if we could do a low cost mission to Mars, Oasis, which would land with seeds in dehydrated nutrient gel, then hydrate them upon landing. And you’d have this great photo of green plants in a red background.The public tends to respond to precedence and superlatives. And this would be the first life on Mars and the furthest life had ever traveled as far as we know.And I thought well that would get people really excited and increase NASA’s budget. So obviously the financial outcome from such a mission would probably be zero. So anything better than that was on the upside.So, I went to Russia three times to look at buying a refurbished ICBM…because that was the best deal. And I can tell you it was very weird going there in late 2001-2002 going to the Russian rocket forces and saying ‘I’d like to buy two of your biggest rockets, but you can keep the nukes.’ That’s a lot more. That was 10 years ago, I guess.They thought I was crazy, but I did have money. So, that was okay.After making several trips to Russia, I came to the conclusion that, my initial impression was wrong about – because my initial thought was, well, that there is not enough will to explore and expand beyond earth and have a Mars base, that kind of thing. That was wrong.In fact, there’s plenty of will, particularly in the United States. Because United States is a nation of explorers, so people who came here from other parts of the world. I think the United States is really a distillation of the spirit of human exploration. But if people think it’s impossible, then well it’s going to completely break the federal budget, then they’re not going to do it.So, after my third trip, I said, okay, what we really need to do here is try to solve the space transport problem and started SpaceX. And this was against the advice of pretty much everyone I talked to.One friend made me watch a bunch of videos of rockets blowing up. Let me tell you he wasn’t far wrong. It was tough going there in the beginning. Because I never built anything physical. I mean I built like a model rocket as a kid and that kind of thing. But I never had a company that built any physical. So, I had to figure out how to do all these things and bring together the right team of people.And we did all that, and then, failed three times. It was tough, tough going.Think about a rocket, the passing grade is 100%. And you don’t get to actually test the rocket in the real environment that is going to be in. So, I think the best analogy for rocket engineers is, if you want to create a really complicated software, you can’t run the software as an integrated whole, and you can’t run it on the computer, it’s intended to run on, but, the first time you run it on the computer, it must run with no bugs.That’s basically the essence of it. So, we missed the mark there.The first launch, I was picking up bits of rocket near the launch site. And we learned with each successive flight. And we were able to, eventually with the fourth flight in 2008, reach orbit. That was also with the last bit of money that we had. Thank goodness that happened. I think the saying is fourth time is the charm?So, we got the Falcon 1 to orbit. And then, began to scale it up to the Falcon 9, with an order of magnitude more thrust, it’s around a million pounds of thrust. We managed to get that to orbit, and then developed the Dragon spacecraft, which recently docked to the space station and returned to earth from the space station.That was a white-knuckle event. It was a huge relief. I still can’t believe it actually happened.But there’s lot more that must happen beyond for humanity to become a space ranked civilization and ultimately a multi-planet species. And that’s something I think it’s vitally important. And I hope that some of you will participate in that either at SpaceX or other companies. Because it’s just really one of the most important things for the preservation and extension of consciousness.It’s worth noting that Earth has been around for 4 billion years, but civilization in terms of having writing has been about 10,000 years, and that’s being generous.So, it’s really somewhat of a tenuous existence that civilization and consciousness has been on earth. And I’m actually fairly optimistic about the future of earth. So I don’t want to people sort of have the wrong impression like we’re all about to die. I think things will most likely be okay for a long time on earth. Not for sure, but, most likely.But even if it’s 99% likely, a 1% chance is still worth spending a fair bit of effort to ensure that we have — back up the biosphere, and planetary redundancy if you will. And I think it’s really quite important.And in order to do that, there’s breakthrough that needs to occur which is to create a rapidly and completely reusable transport system to Mars, which is one of those things that’s right on the borderline of impossible.But, that’s the sort of the thing that we’re going to try to achieve with SpaceX.And then, on the Tesla front, the goal with Tesla was really to try to show what electric cars can do. Because people had the wrong impression, and we had to change people’s perceptions of electric vehicle. Because they used to think of it as something that was slow and ugly, with low range, like a golf cart. So, that’s why we created the Tesla Roadster, to show that it can be fast, attractive and long range.And it’s amazing how — even though you can show that something works on paper, and the calculations are very clear, until you actually have the physical object, and they can drive it, it doesn’t really sink in for people. So that I think is something worth nothing.If you’re going to create a company, the first thing you should try to do is create a working prototype. Everything looks great on PowerPoint. You can make anything work on PowerPoint. If you have an actual demonstration article, even if it’s in primitive form, that’s much more effective in convincing people.So we made the Tesla Roadster, and now we’re coming out soon with model S, which is a 4-door sedan. Because we made the Tesla Roadster people said, ‘Sure we always knew you could make a car like that, it’s an expensive car and it’s low volume and small and all that but can you make a real car?’ Okay, fine, we’re going to make that, too. So, that’s coming out soon.And so that’s where things are and hopefully, there are lessons to be drawn there.I think the overreaching point I want to make is you guys are the magicians of the 21th century, don’t let anything hold you back.Imagination is the limit. Go out there and create some magic.Thank you.Thank you very much for having me, look forward to talking about the SpaceX Mars architecture.And what I really want to try to achieve here is to make Mars seem possible, make it seem as though it's something that we can do in our lifetimes %u2014 and that you can go, and is there really a way that anyone can go if they wanted to? I think that's really the important thing.So first of all, why go anywhere, right? The... I think there are really two fundamental paths. History is going to bifurcate along two directions: One path is we stay on Earth forever, and then there will be some eventual extinction event %u2014 I don't have an immediate doomsday prophecy %u2014 but there's... it's eventually, history just that there will be some doomsday event.The alternative is to become a space-faring civilization and a multi-planet species, which I hope you agree that is the right way to go.Yes?That's what we want.So how do we figure out how to take you to Mars and create a self-sustaining city? A city that it is not merely an outpost, but could become planet and its own right, and thus we could become a truly multi-planet species.There are... Sometimes people wonder, what about other places in the solar system, why Mars?Well, just to sort of put things in perspective, this is what, this is an actual scale of what the solar system looks like. So we're currently in the third little rock from the left.That's Earth.Yeah, exactly.And our goal is to go to the fourth rock on the left %u2014 that's Mars. But you can get a sense for the real scale of the solar system, how big the Sun is, Jupiter, Neptune, Saturn, Uranus, and then the little guys and on the right are Pluto and friends.This sort of helps see it, not quite to scale, but it gives you a better sense for where things are. So our options for going to... For becoming a multi-planet species within our solar system, are limited.We have, in terms of nearby options, we've got Venus. But Venus is a high pressure... A super-high-pressure hot acid bath. So that would be a tricky one. Venus is not at all like that the goddess. This is not, in no way similar to, to the actual goddess. So it'd be really difficult to make things work on Venus. Mercury is also way too close to the Sun. We could go potentially onto... One of the moons of Jupiter, or Saturn, but those are quite far out %u2014 much further from the Sun. A lot harder to get to.It really leaves us with one option if we want to become a multi-planet civilization, and that's Mars.We could conceivably go to the moon, and I have nothing against going to the moon, but I think it's challenging to create a... Become multiplanetary on the moon because it's much smaller than been a planet. It doesn't have any atmosphere, it's not as resource-rich as Mars, it's got a 28-day day %u2014 whereas the Mars day is 24-and-a-half hours. And in general Mars is far better suited to ultimately scale up to be a self-sustaining civilization.Just to give some comparison between the two planets... They're actually remarkably close in a lot of ways. And in fact we now believe that early Mars was a lot like Earth. And in fact if we could warm Mars up, we would once again have a thick atmosphere and liquid oceans.So where things are right now, Mars is about half again as far from the sun as Earth. So still decent sunlight. It's a little cold, but we can warm it up. And it has a very helpful atmosphere which, in the case of Mars, being primarily CO2 with some nitrogen, and argon, and few other trace elements, means that we can grow plants on Mars just by compressing the atmosphere. And so it's... And it has nitrogen, too, which is very important for growing plants.It would be quite fun because you have gravity, which is about 37% that of Earth, so you'd be able to lift heavy things and bound around and have a lot of fun. And the day is remarkably close to that of Earth, and so we just need to change that bottom row, because currently we have 7 billion people on earth and zero on Mars.So there's been a lot of great work by NASA and other organizations in early exploration of Mars and understanding... what Mars is like, where could we land, what's the composition of the atmosphere, where is there water %u2014 water ice, I should say %u2014 and so we need to go from these early exploration missions to actually building a city.The issue that we have today is that if you look at a Venn diagram, there's no intersection of sets of people who want to go and can afford to go. In fact right now, you cannot go to Mars for infinite money.Using traditional methods, you know if you've taken a sort of Apollo-style approach, an optimistic class number would be about $10 billion a person. So for example, in the Apollo program, the cost estimates are somewhere between $100 to $200 billion in current-year dollars. And we sent 12 people to the surface of moon. Which was an incredible thing and probably the greatest achievements of humanity.But that's a steep price to pay for a ticket. That's why these circles only just barely touch. So you can't create a self-sustaining civilization if the ticket price is $10 billion per person.What we need is a closer, is to move those circles together.If we can get the cost of moving to Mars to be roughly equivalent to a median house price in the US, which is around $200,000, then I think the probability of establishing a self-sustaining civilization is very high. I think it would almost certainly occur. Not everyone wants to go %u2014 in fact, I think a relatively small number of people from Earth want to go %u2014 but enough would want to go, and who could afford the trip, that would happen.You keep looking at sponsorship and I think it gets the point where we're almost anyone if they saved up, and this was their goal, they could ultimately save enough money to buy a ticket and move to Mars. And Mars would have a labor shortage for a long time, so jobs would not be in short supply.So it is a bit tricky. We have to figure out how to improve the cost of trips to Mars by 5,000,000%. So this is just not easy and... I mean, it sounds like virtually impossible, but I think there are ways through it.This translates to an improvement of approximately four-and-a-half orders of magnitude.These are the key elements that are needed in order to achieve a four-and-a-half order of magnitude improvement. Most of the improvement would come from full reusability, somewhere between two and two-and-a-half orders of magnitude. And then the other two orders of magnitude would come from refilling in orbit, propellant production on Mars, and choosing the right propellant.So I'm gunna go into detail on all those.Full reusability is really the super-hard one.It's very difficult to achieve reusability on even an orbital system. And that challenge becomes even you substantially greater for a system that has to go to another planet.But as an example of the difference between reusability and expandability in aircraft %u2014 and you could actually use any form of transport, you could say a car, bicycle, horse %u2014 if they were single-use, almost no one would use them. They'd be too expensive.But with frequent flights you can take something like an aircraft that costs $90 million, and if it were single-use, you'd have to pay half a million dollars per flight. But you can actually buy a ticket on Southwest, right now, from LA to Vegas, for $43 %u2014 including taxes. So that's, I mean, that's a massive improvement right there. It's showing a four-order-of-magnitude improvement.Now this is harder. The reusability doesn't apply quite as much to Mars, because the number of times that you could reuse the spaceship %u2014 the spaceship part of the system %u2014 is left less often because the Earth-Mars rendezvous only occurs every 26 months.So you get to use the spaceship part roughly every 2 years. Now you get to use the booster and the tanker as frequently as you'd like, and so it makes %u2014 that's why it really makes a lot of sense to load the spaceship into orbit, with essentially tanks dry, have it have really quite big tanks that you then use the booster and tanker to refill while it's in orbit, and maximize the payload of the spaceships, so that when it goes to Mars you really have a very large payload capability.So refilling in orbit is one of the essential elements of this.Without refilling in orbit, you would have a half-order of magnitude impact, roughly, on the cost. By half of magnitude %u2014 I think audience mostly knows %u2014 but what that means is, each order of magnitude is a factor of 10. So not refilling in orbit would mean a 500%, roughly, increase in the cost per ticket.It also allows us to build a smaller vehicle and lower the development costs, although this is quite big, but it would be much harder to build something that's five to 10 times the size. And it also reduces the sensitivity of performance characteristics of the booster rocket and tanker.So if there's a shortfall in the performance of any of the elements, you can actually make up for it by having one or two extra refilling trips to the spaceship. So this, it's very important for reducing the susceptibility of the system to a performance shortfall.And then producing propellant on Mars is very obviously important.Again if, if we didn't do this, it would have at least a half-order of magnitude increase in the in the cost of the trip, so a 500% increase in the cost the trip.It'd be pretty absurd to try to build the city on Mars if your spaceship just kept staying on Mars not going back to Earth. You'd have this like massive graveyard of ships. You'd have to like do something with them. So it really wouldn't make sense to leave your spaceships on Mars.You really want to build a propellant plant on Mars and send the ships back. And Mars happens to work out well for that, because it has a CO2 atmosphere, it's got water ice in the soil, and with H2O and CO2 you can do CH4 methane and oxygen, O2.Picking the right propellant is also important.Think of this as maybe there's three main choices, and they have their merits. But kerosene or rocket-propellant grade kerosene, which is also what jets use %u2014 rockets use a very expensive form, a highly refined form of jet fuel, essentially, which is a form of kerosene. It helps keep the vehicle size small, but because it's a very specialized form of jet fuel, it's quite expensive. The reusability potential is lower. Very difficult to make this on Mars, because there's no oil. So really quite difficult to make propellants on Mars, and then propellant transfer is pretty good but not great.Hydrogen, although it has a high specific impulse, is very expensive. Incredibly difficult to keep from boiling off, because liquid hydrogen is very close to absolute zero as a liquid. So the insulation required is tremendous, and the energy cost on Mars of producing and storing hydrogen is very high. So we look at the overall system optimization, it was clear to us that methane actually was the clear winner. So it would require maybe anywhere from your 50% to 60% of the energy on Mars to refill the propellants, using a propellant depot, and just the technical challenges are a lot easier.So we think we think methane is actually better, on, really, almost across the board. And we started off initially thinking that hydrogen would make sense, but we came to the conclusion that the best way to optimize the cost-per-unit mass to Mars and back is to use an all-methane system, technically a deep-cryo methalox.So those are the four elements that need to be achieved. So whatever architecture, whatever system is designed, whether by SpaceX or anyone, we think these are the four features that need to be addressed in order for the system to really achieve a low cost per trip to the surface of Mars.And this is a simulation of the overall system.So what you saw there is really quite close to what we will actually build. It will look almost exactly what you saw, so this is not an artist's impression. These... The simulation was actually made from the space engineering CAD models.So this is not, you know, it's not just 'this is what it might look like,' this is what we plan to try and make it look like.So in the video you got a sense for what the system architecture looks.The rocket booster and the spaceship take off, load the spaceship into orbit. The rocket booster then comes back %u2014 it comes back quite quickly, within about 20 minutes %u2014 and so it can actually launch the tanker version of the spacecraft, which is essentially the same as the spaceship, but filling up the unpressurized and pressurized cargo areas with propellant tanks.So they look almost identical, this also helps lower the development costs, which absolutely will not be small. And then that the propellant tanker goes up %u2014 and it will actually go up multiple times, anywhere from three to five times %u2014 to fill the tanks of the spaceship in orbit. And then once the spaceship tanks are full, the cargo has been transferred, and we reach the Mars rendezvous timing, which as I mentioned is roughly every 26 months, that's when the ship would depart.Now over time there would be many spaceships. Ultimately, I think, upwards of 1,000 or more spaceships waiting in orbit. And so the Mars colonial fleet would depart en masse, kind of 'Battlestar Galactica' %u2014 if you've seen that thing, it's a good show %u2014 so a bit like that. But it actually makes sense to load the spaceships into orbit, because you've got 2 years to do so, and then make frequent use of the booster and the tanker to get really heavy reuse out of those.And then with the spaceship you get less reuse because you have say, 'well, how long is it gunna last?' Well, maybe 30 years. So that might be 12, maybe 15 flights of the spaceship, at most. So you really want to maximize the cargo of the spaceship and reuse the booster and the tanker a lot. So the ship goes to Mars, gets replenished, and then returns to Earth.So I'll go into some of the details of the vehicle design and performance, and I%u2019m gunna gloss over %u2014 I'll only talk a little bit about that the technical details in the actual presentation, and then I%u2019ll leave the detailed technical questions to the Q&A that follows.This is to give us a sense of size.It's quite big, yeah.And the funny thing is I think in the long term, the ships will be even bigger than this. I think that this will represent, this will be relatively small compared to the Mars interplanetary ships of the future.But it kind of needs to be about this size, because if, in order to fit 100 people there around in the pressurized section, plus carry the luggage and all of the unpressurized cargo %u2014 to build propellant plants and build everything from iron foundries, to pizza joints, to you name it %u2014 we need to carry a lot of cargo. So it really needs to be roughly on this order magnitude. Because if we say, like, the same amount of threshold for self-sustaining studio Mars or civilization would be a million people, well, and you can only go every 2 years %u2014 if you have 100 people per ship, that's 10,000 trips.So I think at least 100 people per trip is the right order of magnitude, and I think we may actually made up expanding the crew section and ultimately taking more like 200 more people per flight in order to reduce the cost per person. So, 10,000 flights is a lot of flights, so you really want to ultimately think on the order of 1,000 ships.It will take awhile to build up to 1,000 ships. And so I think if you say, when would we reach that million-person threshold, from the point at which the first ship goes to Mars, it's probably somewhere between 20 to 50 total Mars rendezvous. So it's probably somewhere between maybe 40 to 100 years to achieve a fully self-sustaining civilization on Mars.So that's the sort of cross-section of the ship, and in some ways it's not that complicated, really.It's made primarily of an advanced carbon-fiber. The carbon-fiber part is tricky when dealing with deep cryogens, and trying to achieve both liquid and gas impermeability, and not have gaps occur due to cracking or pressurization that would make the carbon fiber leaky. So this is a fairly significant technical challenge to make deeply cryogenic tanks out of carbon fiber, and it's only recently that we think the carbon fiber technology has gotten to the point where we can actually do this without having to create a liner %u2014 some sort of metal liner, or other liner, on the inside of the tanks, which would add mass and complexity.It's particularly tricky for the hot, gaseous oxygen pressurization. So this is designed to be autogenously pressurized, which means that the fuel and the oxygen, we gassify them through heat exchangers in the engine, and use that to pressurize the tanks. So we'll gassify the methane, and use that to pressurize the fuel tank. Gassify the oxygen, use that to pressurize the oxygen tank.And this compares %u2014 this is a much simpler system than what we have with Falcon 9, where we use helium for pressurization, and we use nitrogen for gas thrusters. In this case we're autogenously pressurized, and then use gaseous methane and oxygen for the control thrusters.So really you only need two ingredients for this, as opposed to four, in the case of Falcon 9. And actually five, if you consider the ignition liquid. It's sort of a complicated liquid to ignite the engines that isn't very reusable. In this case we would use spark-ignition.So this gives you a sense of vehicles by performance, sort of current and historic. I don't know if you can actually read that, but: In expendable mode of the vehicle parts that were proposing, we'd do about 550 tons, and about 300 tons in reusable mode. That compares to Saturn V's max capability of 135 tons.But I think this really gives a better sense of things.The white bars show the performance of the vehicle. Like, in other words, the payload-to-orbit of the vehicle. So you can see, essentially, what it represents is: What is the size efficiency of the vehicle? And most rockets, including ours %u2014 ours that are currently flying %u2014 the performance bar is only a small percentage of the actual size of the rocket.But with the interplanetary system, which will initially be used for Mars, we've been able to %u2014 we believe %u2014 massively improve the design performance. So it's the first time a rocket's sort of 'performance bar' will actually exceed the physical size of the rocket.This gives you a more direct sort of comparison.This is, the trust is quite enormous. We're talking about a liftoff thrust of 13,000 tons. So it will be quite tectonic when it takes off. But it does fit on a pad 39A, which NASA has been kind enough to allow us to use, where they somewhat oversized the pad in doing Saturn V. And, as a result, we can actually do a much larger vehicle on that same launchpad. And in the future we expect to add additional launch locations, probably adding one on the south coast of Texas.But this gives you a sense of the relative capabilities, if you can read those. But these vehicles have very different purposes. This is really intended to carry huge numbers of people, ultimately millions of tons of cargo to Mars. So you really need something quite large in order to do that.To talk about some of the key elements of the interplanetary spaceship and rocket booster, we decided to start off the development with what we think are probably the two most difficult elements of the design.One is the Raptor engine, and this is going to be the highest chamber pressure engine of any kind ever built, and probably the highest thrust-to-weight.It's a full-flow, stage-combustion engine, which maximizes the theoretical momentum that you can get out of a given source of fuel and oxidizer. We sub-cool the oxygen and methane to densify it. So compared to when propellants are normally used, they're used close to their boiling points in in most rockets.In our case we actually load the propellants close to their freezing point, and that can result in a density improvement of up to around 10% to 12%, which makes an enormous difference in the actual results of the rocket.It also makes the %u2014 it gets rid of any cavitation risk for the turbo pumps, and it makes it easier to feed a high-pressure turbo pump if you have very cold propellant.Really one of the keys here, though, is the vacuum version of Raptor having a 382-second ISP [specific impulse]. This is really quite critical to the whole Mars mission, and we're confident we can get to that number, or at least within a few seconds of that number, ultimately maybe exceeding it slightly.The rocket booster, in many ways, is really a scaled-up version of the Falcon 9 booster.You'll see a lot of similarities, such as the grid fins, obviously clustering a lot of engines at the base, and the big difference really being that the primary structure is an advanced form a carbon-fiber, as opposed to aluminum-lithium. And that we use autogenous pressurization, and we get rid of the helium and the nitrogen.So, this uses 42 Raptor engines. It's a lot of engines, but we use nine on a Falcon 9, and with Falcon Heavy, which should launch early next year, there's 27 engines on the base. So we've got pretty good experience with having a large number of engines. It also gives us redundancy, so there if some of the engines fail, you can still continue the mission and be fine.But the main job of the booster is to accelerate the spaceship to around 8,500 kilometers an hour. For those that aren't as familiar with orbital dynamics, really it's all about velocity and not about height. So really that's the job of the boosters. The booster's like the javelin thrower %u2014 so it's gotta toss that javelin, which is the spaceship. In the case of other planets, though, which have a gravity well that is not as deep. So Mars, the moons of Jupiter, see if we went to maybe even Venus %u2014Venus will be a little trickier %u2014 but for most of the solar system, you only need the spaceship.So you don't you don't need the booster if you have a lower gravity wells. So no booster is needed on the moon or Mars or any other moons of Jupiter or Pluto. You just need the spaceship. The booster is just there for heavy gravity wells.And then we've also been able to optimize the propellant needed for boost-back and landing, to get it down to about 7%, of the liftoff propellant load, and we think with some optimization we can get down to about 6%.And we're also getting quite comfortable with the accuracy of the landing. If you've been watching the Falcon 9 landings, you'll see that they're getting increasingly closer to the bull%u2019s-eye. And we think, particularly with the addition of some thrusters, maneuvering thrusters, we can actually put the rooster right back on the launch stand. And then those pins at the base are essentially centering features to take out any minor position mismatch at the launch site.So that's looks like at the base so we think we only need to gimbal or steer the center cluster of engines.So there's seven engines in the center cluster, those would be the ones that that move, for steering the rocket, and the other ones would be fixed in position, which gives us the best concentration of %u2014 we can max out the number of engines because we don't have to leave any room for gimbaling or moving the engine.And this is all designed so that you could actually lose multiple engines, even at liftoff or anywhere flight, and continue the mission safely.So for the spaceship itself, in the top we have the pressurized compartment %u2014 and I%u2019ll show you a fly-through of that in a moment %u2014 and beneath that is where we would have the unpressurized cargo, which will be really flat-packed, in a very dense format. And below that is the liquid oxygen tank.The liquid oxygen tank is probably the hardest piece of this whole vehicle because it's gotta handle propellant at the coldest level, and the tanks themselves actually form the airframe. So that the air frame structure and the tank structure are combined, as it is in in all modern rockets, and in an aircraft. For example, the wing is really a fuel tank in wing shape. So it has to take the thrust loads of ascent, the loads of re-entry, and then it has to be impermeable to gaseous oxygen, which is tricky, and non-reactive to gaseous oxygen.So that's the hardest piece of the spaceship itself, which is actually why we started on that element. I will show you some pictures of that later.And then below the oxygen tank is the fuel tank, and then the engines are mounted directly to the thrust cone on the base. And then there are six of the of the vacuum, the high-efficiency vacuum engines around the perimeter, and those of those don't gimbal. And then three of the sea-level versions of the engine, which do gimbal and provide the steering. Although we can do some amount of steering, if you're in space, with differential thrust on the outside engines.The net effect is a cargo-to-Mars of up to 450 tons, depending upon how many refills you do with the tanker. The goal is at least 100 passengers per ship, although I think ... we'll probably see that number go to 200 or more.This chart's a little difficult to interpret at first, but I kind of decided to put it there for people who wanted to watch the video afterwards and sort of take a closer look, analyze some of the numbers.The column on the left is probably what's most relevant, and that gives you the trip time.So depending upon which Earth-Mars rendezvous you're aiming for, the trip time at six kilometers per second, departure velocity, can be as low as 80 days. And then, over time, I think we'd obviously improve that, and ultimately I suspect that you'd see Mars transit times of as little as 30 days in the more distant future.So it's fairly manageable, considering the trips that people used to in the old days. They'd routinely take sailing voyages that would be 6 months or more.So on arrival the heat shield technology is extremely important.We've been refining the heat-shield technology using our Dragon spacecraft, and we're now on version three of PICA, which is 'phenolic impregnated carbon ablator, ' and it's getting more robust with each new version, with less ablation, more resistance, less need for refurbishment.The heat shield's basically a giant brake pad. So it's like, how good can you make that brake pad against extreme reentry conditions, and minimize the cost of refurbishment. And make it so that you could have many flights with no refurbishment at all.This is a fly-through of the crew compartment. Just want to give you a sense of what it would feel like to actually be in the spaceship.I mean, in order to make it appealing, and an increase that portion of the Venn diagram of people actually want to go, it's gotta be really fun and exciting and it can't feel cramped or boring.So the crew compartment or the occupant department, is set up so that you can do zero-g games, you can float around, there'll be like movies, lecture halls, you know, cabins, a restaurant %u2014 it will be, like, really fun to go. You're gunna have a great time.So that propellant plant on Mars.Again, this is one of the slides I won't go into detail here, but people can think about offline.The key point being that the ingredients are there on Mars to create a propellant plant with relative ease, because the atmosphere is primarily CO2, and there's water ice almost everywhere. You've got the CO2 plus H2O to make methane, CH4, and oxygen O2, using the Sebatier reaction.The trickiest thing, really, is the energy source, which we think we can do with a large field of solar panels.So then to give you a sense of the cost, really the key is making this affordable to almost anyone who wants to go. And we think, based on this architecture, assuming optimization over time, like, the very first flights would be fairly expensive %u2014 but the architecture allows for a cost-per-ticket of less than $200,000, maybe as little as $100,000 over time, depending upon how much mass a person takes.So we're, right now, estimating about $140,000 per ton to the surface of Mars. So if a person plus their luggage is less than that, taking into account food consumption and life-support, then we think that the cost of moving to Mars could drop below $100,000.So, funding. We've thought about funding sources.And so it's steal underpants, launch satellites, send cargo to space station, Kickstarter %u2014 of course %u2014 followed by profit. So obviously it's going to be a challenge to fund this whole endeavor.We do expect to generate pretty decent net cash flow from launching lots of satellites and servicing the space station for NASA, transferring cargo to and from the space station, and then I know that there's a lot of people in the private sector who are interested in helping fund a base on Mars. And then perhaps they'll be interest on the government sector side to also do that.Ultimately this is going to be a huge public-private partnership, and I think that's how the United States established, and many other countries around the world %u2014 is a public-private partnership. So I think that's probably what occurs, and right now we're just trying to make as much progress as we can with the resources that we have available, and just sort of keep moving both forward, and hopefully I think, as we show that this is possible, that this dream is real, not just a dream %u2014 it's something that can be made real %u2014 I think the support will snowball over time.And I should say also that the main reason I%u2019m personally accumulating assets is in order to fund this. So I really don't have any other motivation for personally accumulating assets, except to be able to make the biggest contribution I can to making life multiplanetary.Timelines.I'm not the best of this sort of thing.But just to show you where we started off, in 2002 SpaceX basically consisted of carpet and a mariachi band. That was it. That's all of SpaceX in 2002. As you can see I'm a dancing machine, and yeah I believe in kicking off celebratory events with mariachi bands. I really like mariachi bands.But that was what we started off with in 2002, and really, I thought maybe we had a 10% percent chance of doing anything %u2014 of even getting a rocket to orbit, let alone getting beyond that and taking Mars seriously.But I came to the conclusion that if there wasn't some new entrance into the space arena with a strong ideological motivation, then it didn't seem like we were on a trajectory to ever be a space-faring civilization and be out there among the stars. Because in '69 we were able to go to the moon, and the space shuttle could get to low-earth orbit, and then obviously the space shuttle got retired, but that trend line is down to zero.So I think what a lot of people don't appreciate is that technology does not automatically improve. It only improves if a lot of really strong engineering talent is applied to the problem that it improves. And there are many examples in history where civilizations have reached a certain technology level, and then have fallen well below that and then recovered only millennia later.So we go from 2002, where we're basically clueless, and then with Falcon 1 %u2014 the smallest useful orbital rocket that we could think of, which would deliver half a ton to orbit. And then 4 years later we developed, we built the first vehicle.So we dropped the main engine, the upper-stage engine, the airframes, the fairing, and the launch system, and had our first attempt at launch in 2006, which failed. So, that lasted about 60 seconds, unfortunately.But it was 2006, 4 years after starting, which is also when we actually got our first NASA contract. And I just want to say that I'm incredibly grateful to NASA for supporting SpaceX, despite the fact that our rocket crashed. It was awesome, I'm NASA's biggest fan %u2014 so you think thank you very much to the people that had the faith to do that.So then 2006, followed by a lot of grief, and then finally the fourth launch of Falcon 1 worked in 2008. And we were really down to our last pennies. In fact, I only thought I had enough money for three launches, and the first three bloody failed, and we were able to scrape together enough to just barely make it into a fourth launch, and that %u2014 thank goodness %u2014 that fourth launch succeeded in 2008.That was a lot of pain.And then also at the end of 2008 is when, where NASA awarded us for the first major operational contract, which was for resupplying cargo to the space station and bringing cargo back. Then a couple of years later we did the first launch of Falcon 9, version 1, and that had about a 10-ton-to-orbit capability, so it was about 20 times the capability of Falcon 1, and also assigned to carry our Dragon spacecraft.Then 2010 is our first mission to the space station, so we were able to finish development of Dragon and dock with the space station in 2010. Sorry %u2014 2010 is expendable Dragon, 2012 is when we delivered and returned cargo from the space station.2013 is when we first started doing vertical takeoff and landing tests.And 2014 is when we were able to have the first orbital booster do a soft landing in the ocean. The landing was soft, then it fell over and exploded, but the landing %u2014 for 7 seconds %u2014 it was good. And we also improved the capability of the vehicle from 10 tons to about 13 tons to LEO [low-Earth orbit].And then 2015, last year in December, that was definitely one of the best moments of my life: when the rocket booster came back and landed at Cape Canaveral. That was really... yeah.So I think that really showed we could bring an orbit-class booster back from a very high velocity, all the way to the launch site, and land it safely, and with almost no refurbishment required for re-flight. And if things go well, we are hoping to re-fly one of the landed boosters and in a few months.So, yeah, and then 2016 we also demonstrated landing on a ship. The landing on the ship is very important for very high-velocity geosynchronous missions, and that's important for reusability of Falcon 9 because about, roughly a quarter of our missions are sort of servicing the space station, and then there's a few other low-Earth orbit mission. But most of our missions %u2014 probably 60% of our missions %u2014 are commercial geo [geosynchronous] missions. So we've got to do these high-velocity missions that really need to land on the ship out to sea. They don't have enough propellant on board to boost back to the launch site.So looking at the future, next steps.We were kind of intentionally a bit fuzzy about this timeline. But the... We're going to try to make as much progress as we can, obviously it's a very constrained budget, but we're going to try to make as much progress as we can on the elements of the interplanetary transport booster and spaceship. And hopefully we'll be able to do, to complete the first development spaceship in maybe about 4 years, and start doing suborbital flights with that.In fact, it actually has enough capability that you could maybe even go to orbit if you limit the amount of cargo with the spaceship. But you have to really, just have to really strip it down. But in tanker form it can definitely get to orbit. It can't get back, but we can get to orbit.Actually, I was sort of thinking, like, maybe there is some sort of market for really fast transport of stuff around the world, provided we can land somewhere where noise is not a super-big deal %u2014 rockets are very noisy %u2014 but we could transport cargo to anywhere on earth in 45 minutes, at the longest. So most places on Earth would be maybe 20, 25 minutes. So maybe if we had a floating platform out off the coast of the USA, off the coast of New York, say 20 or 30 miles out, you could go from, you know, from New York to Tokyo in %u2014 I don't know %u2014 25 minutes. Cross the Atlantic in 10 minutes. Really, most of your time would be getting to the ship. And then it'd be real quick after that.So there's some intriguing possibilities there, although we're not counting on that.And then development of the booster. And actually the booster part is relatively straightforward, because it amounts to a scaling-up of the Falcon 9 booster. So there's, we don't see a lot of show stoppers there. So yeah.But then trying to put it all together and make this actually work for Mars. If things go super-well, it might be kind of in the 10-year time frame. But I don't wanna say that's when it will occur, there's a huge amount of risk, it's going to cost a lot, good chance we won't succeed, but we're going to do our best, and we're going try to make as much progress as possible.Oh and we're gunna try to send something to Mars on every Mars rendezvous from here on out. So Dragon 2, which is a propulsive lander, we plan to send to Mars in a couple years. And then do probably another Dragon mission in 2020.In fact, we want to establish a steady cadence %u2014 that there's always a flight leaving, like a train leaving the station. With every Mars rendezvous we will be sending a Dragon %u2014 at least a Dragon to Mars, and ultimately the big spaceship %u2014 so if there are people that are interested in putting payloads on Dragon, you know you can count on a ship that's going to transport something on the order of at least 2 or 3 tons of useful payload to the surface of Mars.Yes, that's part of the reason why we designed Dragon 2 to be a propulsive lander.As a propulsive lander, you can go anywhere in the solar system. So you could go to the moon, you could go to... Well, anywhere, really. Whereas if something relies on parachutes or wings, then you can pretty much only %u2014 well if it's wings, you can pretty much only land on Earth, because you need a runway, and most places don't have a runway. And then any place that doesn't have a dense atmosphere, you can't use parachutes.But propulsive works anywhere. So Dragon should be capable of landing on any solid or liquid surface in the inner solar system.And then I was real excited to see that the team managed to do the, all of our Raptor engine firing, in advance of this conference. I just want to say thanks to the Raptor team for really working 7 days a week to try to get this done of in advance of the presentation, because I really want to show that we've made some hardware progress in this direction, and the Raptors are really tricky engines.It's a lot trickier than the Merlin, because it's a full-flow stage combustion %u2014 much higher pressure. I'm kind of amazed it didn't blow up on the first firing, but fortunately it was good.Yeah. It's kind of interesting to the Mach diamonds forming.So the... Part of the reason for making engines small... Raptor, although it has three times the thrust of a Merlin, is actually only about the same size as well an engine, because it has three times the operating pressure. And that means we can use a lot of the production techniques that we've honed with Merlin.We're currently producing Merlin engines at almost 300 per year. So we understand how to make rocket engines in volume, so even though the mars vehicle uses 42 on the base and nine on the upper stage %u2014 so we have 51 engines to make %u2014 that's well within our production capabilities for Merlin, and this is a similarly sized engine to Merlin, except for the expansion ratio, so we feel really comfortable about being able to make this engine in volume at a price that doesn't break our budget.And then we also wanted to make progress on the primary structure, so as I mentioned this is really... a very difficult thing to make. Is to make something out of carbon fiber.Even though carbon fiber has incredible strength-to-weight, when you want one of them put super-cold liquid oxygen and liquid methane %u2014 particularly liquid oxygen %u2014 in the tank, it's subject to cracking and leaking and it's a very difficult thing to make.Just the sheer scale of it is also challenging, because you've gotta lay out the carbon fiber in exactly the right way on a huge mold, and you've gotta cure that mold at temperature, and then it's... just really hard to make large carbon-fiber structures that can do all of those things and carry incredible loads.So that's the other thing we wanted to focus on, was the Raptor, and then building the first development tank for the Mars spaceship.So this is really the hardest part of the spaceship. The other pieces are, we have a pretty good handle on, but this was the trickiest one. So we wanted to tackle it first. You get a size for how big the tank is. It's really quite big.Also, big congratulations to the team that worked on that %u2014 they were also working seven days a week to try to get this done in advance of the IAC.And so we managed to build the first tank and initial tests with the cryogenic propellant actually look quite positive. We have not seen any leaks or major issues.This is what the tank looks like on the inside.So you can get a real sense for how much, just how big this tank is. It's actually completely smooth on the inside, but the way that the carbon-fiber plys reflect the light makes it look faceted.So what about beyond Mars?So as we thought about this system, and the reason we call it a system %u2014 because generally I don't like calling things systems, because everything's a system, including your dog %u2014 is that it's actually more than a vehicle. There's this rocket booster, the spaceship, the tanker, and the propellant plant, the in situ propellant production.If you have all of those four elements, you can actually go anywhere in the solar system by planet-hopping or by moon-hopping.So by establishing a propellant depot in the Asteroid Belt, or on one of the moons of Jupiter, you can go, you can make flights from Mars to Jupiter %u2014 no problem.In fact, even from, even without a propellant depot at Mars, you could do a flyby of Jupiter without a propellant depot.But by establishing a propellant depot, let's say, you know, Enceladus or Europa, or any %u2014 there's a few options %u2014 and then doing another one on Titan, Saturn's moon, and then perhaps another one further out on Pluto, or elsewhere in the solar system...This system really gives you freedom to go anywhere you want in the greater solar system. So you could actually travel out to the Kuiper Belt, the Oort Cloud.I wouldn't recommend this for interstellar journeys, but this basic system %u2014 provided we have filling stations along the way %u2014 is, means full access to the entire greater solar system.It'd be really great to do a mission to Europa, particularly.In life, we’ve seen, within this part of the world, great people, like Al-Khawarizmi who invented algorithm. Globally, Newton. Henry Ford, the Wright Brothers, Albert Einstein and Elon Musk. See, you are in rush, You want to go to places that nobody has been. You are re-inventing a certain industry, from the rocket industry with SpaceX to the car industry with Tesla. What’s your life mission? Why do you do whatever you do?Sure, first of all, thank you for having me. It’s an honor to be here. And I’m having a really great time with my kids in Dubai. It’s really been fantastic. I really encourage anyone who hasn’t been to visit, what a great city! Thank you.And, in terms of the motivations, I used to like this sort of… kind of a long version of the explanation but… essentially, when I was a kid I was wondering, what’s the meaning of life? Like, why are we here? What is it all about? And I came to the conclusion that what really matters is trying to understand the right questions to ask. And the more that we can increase the scope and scale of human consciousness, the better we’re able to ask these questions. And… So, I think there are certain things that are necessary to ensure that the future is good. And… some of those things are in the long term having long term sustainable transport and sustainable energy generation. And to be a space exploring civilization. And for humanity to be out there among the stars. And be a multi-planetary species. I think that being a multi-planetary species and being out there among the stars is important for the long-term survival of humanity. And, that’s one reason, kind of like life insurance for life collectively. Life as we know it. But then the part that I find personally most motivating is that it creates a sense of adventure, and it makes people excited about the future. If you consider two futures, one where we are forever confined to Earth until eventually something terrible happens. Or another future where we are out there on many planets, maybe even going beyond the solar system. I think that space invasion is incredibly exciting and inspiring. And there need to be reasons to get up in the morning. You know, life can’t just be about solving problems. Otherwise, what’s the point? There’s got to be things that people find inspiring and make life worth living.Read LessSo, what is life for you? I mean, you look at our life, and I heard you before speaking. Is it a dream? Is it real? Is it a million deal? What is life for Elon Musk?I find that as I get older I find that question to be maybe more and more confusing or troubling or uncertain. Particularly when you see the advancement of something like video games. You know, 40 years ago, you had video games, the most advanced video game would be like Pong, when you had two rectangles and a dot. And you’re like batting it back and forth. – I played it. – Yeah, me too, exactly. – Us all. – It sort of dates you a little bit. Yeah, we both played the same game. And that was like a pretty fun game at the time. But now, you can see a video game that’s photo-realistic, almost photo-realistic, and millions of people playing simultaneously. And, and you see where things are going with virtual reality. And augmented reality and… if you extrapolate that out into the future with any rate of progress at all, like keeping 0.1% of something like that a year, then eventually those games will be indistinguishable from reality. They’ll be so realistic you won’t be able to tell the difference between that game and reality as we know it. And then, it seems like, well, how do we know that that didn’t happen in the past? And that we’re not in one of those games ourselves?Interesting. Interesting. I mean, it could be. Everything is possible in life.I mean there’s… Yeah, particularly like things tend to be accelerating to something.Isn’t it? I mean, if we look at our life, it seems in the past 100 years life has been accelerating quite fast. – Yeah. – In the past 20 years. – It’s getting faster and faster. – Is it more slow? So, my question is really, how will life be 20, 30, 50 years from now? Our education, our transport. How do you see it?Well, I think this is one of those things that are quite difficult to predict. When you think of, say, the first controlled power flight was in 1903 with the Wright Brothers. And then, 66 years later we put the first people on the moon. I mean, if you asked people, say, in 1900, what are the odds of landing on the moon they would’ve said that’s ridiculous. If you try to talk to them about the internet they wouldn’t know what the heck you’re even… What are you talking about? Like, this sounds so crazy. But today, with a hundred-dollar device you can video-conference with anyone in the world. On the other side of the world, and if you have a Wi-Fi connection, it’s basically free. You’re free to have an instant visual communication with anyone, or even with millions of people. You know, with social media you can communicate to millions of people simultaneously. So, and you can google something and ask any question. It’s like an oracle of wisdom, that you can ask almost any questions and get an instant response. It would be incredibly difficult to predict these things in the past. Even the relatively recent past. So, I think the one thing that we can be quite certain of is that any predictions we make today for what the future will be like in 50 years will be wrong That’s for sure. I think directionally, I can tell you what I hope the future has, as opposed to maybe what it will be. This may just be wishful thinking.I mean I hope we are out there on Mars and maybe beyond Mars, Jupiter. I hope we’re traveling frequently throughout the solar system, perhaps preparing for missions to nearby star systems. I think all of that is possible in 50 years. And I think it’s going to be very exciting to do that. And, I think we’ll see autonomy and artificial intelligence advance tremendously. Like that’s actually quite near term. My guess is in probably 10 years, it will be very unusual for cars to be built that are not fully autonomous. – 10 years. – 10 years from now? Yeah. I think almost all cars built will be able of full autonomy in about 10 years. As it is, the Tesla cars that are made today, have the sensor system necessary for full autonomy. And we think probably enough compute power to be safer than a person. So, it’s mostly just the question of developing the software and uploading the software. And if it turns out that more compute power is needed, we can easily upgrade the computer. And, so that’s all Teslas built since October last year. And other manufacturers will follow and do the same thing. So, getting in a car will be like getting in an elevator. You just tell it where you want to go, and it takes you there with extreme levels of safety. And that will be normal, that will just be normal. Like, for elevators, they used to be elevator operators. You get in, there will be a guy moving a lever. Now, you just get in, you press the button and that’s taken for granted. So, autonomy will be wide-spread.I think one of the most troubling questions is artificial intelligence. And I don’t mean narrow AI, like, vehicle autonomy I would put in the narrow AI class. It’s narrowly trying to achieve a certain function. But deep artificial intelligence, or what is sometimes called artificial general intelligence, where you can have AI that is much smarter than the smartest human on Earth. This, I think, is a dangerous situation.Why is it dangerous? I mean, there are two views, one view is that artificial intelligence will help humanity, and there’s another school of thought that artificial intelligence is a threat to humanity. – Why is that?I think it’s both. You know, it’s like… one way to think of it is imagine we’re going to be visited… imagine you’re very confident that we’re going to be visited by super intelligent aliens, in let’s say 10 years or 20 years at the most. – Super intelligent.So, you think within 20 years… – Yeah… – we’ll have aliens on Earth?Well, digital super intelligence will be like an alien. – It will be like an alien. – Yeah. But my question is, do you think there is other intelligent life outside the Earth? It seems probable. I think this is one of the great questions in physics and philosophy, is, where are the aliens? Maybe they are among us, I don’t know. Some people think I’m an alien. Not true. – Not true.But maybe we are aliens. Maybe we aliens. I mean, if you look at this part of the world. Yeah. They believe that human beings are not from Earth, they came from somewhere else. Eve and Adam came from somewhere else to Earth. So, in a way, human beings are aliens to this land. Do you think we’ll make contact with aliens within the next 50 years?Well, that’s a really tough one to say. If there are super intelligent aliens out there, they’re probably already observing us. That would seem quite likely and we’re not smart enough to realize it. But I can do some back of the envelope calculations and… any advanced alien civilization that is at all interested in populating the galaxy, even without exceeding the speed of light, even if you’re only moving at, say, 10 or 20 per cent of the speed of light, you could populate the entire galaxy in let’s say 10 million years. Maybe 20 million years max. This is nothing in the grand scheme of things.Once you said you wanted to die on Mars. Why?To be clear, I don’t want to die on Mars. It’s like, if… we’re all going to die someday, and if you’re going to pick some place to die, then why not Mars? You know, if you’re born on Earth, why not die on Mars? Seems like may be quite exciting. But, I think given the choice between dying on Earth and dying on Mars, I’d say, yeah, sure, I’ll die on Mars. But it’s not some kind of Mars death wish. And if I do die on Mars, I just don’t want to go on impact.Let’s come back to Earth, actually. You tweeted that you are building a tunnel under Washington D.C. Why?What is it? – It’s a secret plot. – Okay. – Just between us. – Nobody helps you? Yeah, exactly, let’s keep that a secret. I think this is going to sound a little… I mean, it seems like so much trivial or silly, but… I’ve been saying this for many years now, but I think that the solution to urban congestion is a network of tunnels under cities. And when I say that I don’t mean a 2-D plan of tunnels, I mean tunnels that go many levels deep. So, you can always go deeper than you can go up. Like, the deepest mines are deeper than the tallest buildings. So, you can have a network of tunnels that is 20, 30, 40, 50 levels, as many levels as you want, really. And so, given that, you can overcome the congestion situation in any city in the world. The challenge is how do you build tunnels quickly and at low cost and with high safety? So, if tunnel technology can be improved to the point where you can build tunnels fast, cheap and safe, then that would completely get rid of any traffic situations in the cities. And so, that’s why I think it’s an important technology. And, Washington D.C., L.A and most of the major American cities, most major cities in the world suffer from severe traffic issues. And it’s mostly because you’ve got these buildings which are, these tall buildings that are 3-D and you have a road network that is one level. And then, people generally want to go in and out of these buildings at the exact same time. So, then, you get the traffic jam.Let’s come back to… your year in Dubai. The first time I met you it was the 4th of June 2015, at your office in SpaceX. And, I asked you would you have a presence in UAE? And your answer was: I’m busy with China. Maybe not in the near future, and almost a year and a half later, we are here, seems time goes quite fast. Why now?I think actually things are going really well in China. So, we have some initial challenges figuring out charging and service infrastructure and various other things, but now it’s actually going really well, and… so the timing seems to be good to really make a significant debut in this region, starting in Dubai.In your opinion, what is the new disturbing thing that will come next in technology? What’s next in technology? – What’s next in technology? – That will disturb the way we live, the way we think, the way we do business.Well, the most near to impact from a technological standpoint is autonomous cars, like fully self-driving cars. I’d say that’s going to happen much faster than people realize. so, and that’s… it’s going to be a great convenience to be in an autonomous car, but there are many people whose job is to drive. So, if… in fact I think it might be the single largest employer of people is driving in various forms. And so, then we need to figure out new rules for what do these people do. But it will all be very disruptive and very quick. I should characterize what I mean by quick. Because there are… Quick means different things to different people. There are about two billion vehicles in the world. Approaching in fact 2.5 billion cars and trucks in the world. The total new vehicle production capacity is about a hundred million. Which makes sense, because the life of a car or truck before it’s finally scraped is about 20-25 years. So, so the point at which we see full autonomy appear will not be the point at which there is massive societal upheaval, because it will take a long time to make enough autonomous vehicles to disrupt employment. So, that disruption I’m talking about will take place over about 20 years. Still, 20 years is a short period of time to have I think something like 12 to 15 per cent of the world force be unemployed.Thank you. This is the largest global government summit we have over 139 governments here. If you want to advise government officials to be ready for the future, what three pieces of advice can you give them?Well, I think the first bit of advice is to really play close attention to… the development of artificial intelligence. I think this is, we need to be just be very careful in… how we adopt artificial intelligence, and to make sure that researchers don’t get carried away, because sometimes what happens is that scientists can get so engrossed in their work, they don’t necessarily realize the ramifications of what they’re doing. So, I think it’s important for public safety that we… you know, governments keep a close eye on artificial intelligence and make sure that it does not represent a danger to the public. Let’s see, secondly, I would say we do need to think about transport in general. And, there’s the movement towards electric vehicles, sustainable transport, I think that’s going to be good for many reasons, but again, not something that happens immediately, that’s going to happen slower than the self-driving vehicles. Because that’s probably something that happens over 30 or 40 years. The transition to electric vehicles. So, thinking about that in context… the demand for electricity will increase dramatically. So, currently, in terms of total energy usage in the world, it’s about 1/3, about 1/3 transport, about 1/3 heating. So, over time that will transition to almost all… not all, but predominantly electricity, which means that the demand for electricity will probably triple. So, it’s going to be very important to think about, how do you make so much more electricity? And…It seems they’ll have an easy job, that’s it, there are no more challenges for them.No, well, I think maybe… these things do play into each other a little bit, but what to do about mass unemployment? This is going to be a massive social challenge. And I think ultimately will have to have some kind of universal basic income I don’t think we’re going to have a choice. – Universal basic income. – Universal basic income. I think it’s going to be necessary.So, it means that unemployed people will be paid across the globe. – Yeah. – Because there are no jobs. Machines, robots are taking over.There will be fewer and fewer jobs that a robot cannot do better. That’s simply… And I want to be clear, these are not things that I wish would happen. These are simply things that I think probably will happen. And so, if my assessment is correct and they probably will happen, then we need to say what are we going to do about it. And I think some kind of universal basic income is going to be necessary. Now, the output of goods and services will be extremely high. So, with automation, there will come abundance. There will be… almost everything will get very cheap. The… So… I think the biggest… I think we’ll just end up doing a universal basic income. It’s going to be necessary. The harder challenge, much harder challenge, is how do people then have meaning? Like a lot of people, they derive their meaning from their employment, so, if you don’t have… if you’re not needed, if there’s not a need for your labor, how do you… what’s the meaning? Do you have meaning? Do you feel useless? That’s a much harder problem to deal with. And then how do we ensure that the future is going to be the future that we want? That we so like.You know, I mean do think that there’s a potential path here which is, I’m really getting into science fiction or sort of advanced science stuff. But, having some sort of merger with biological intelligence, and machine intelligence. To some degree, we are already a cyborg. You think of like the digital tools that you have, your phone and your computer, the applications that you have. Like the fact that as I mentioned earlier you can ask a question and instantly get an answer from Google or from other things. And, and so you already have a digital touchery layer. I say touchery because you can think of the limbic system, kind of the animal brain or the primal brain and then the cortex, kind of the thinking, planning part of the brain, and then your digital self as a third layer. So, you already have that, and I think if somebody dies, their digital ghost is still around. All of their e-mails and the pictures that they posted and their social media. That still lives, even if they died. So, over time I think we’ll probably see a closer merger of biological intelligence and digital intelligence. And it’s mostly about the bandwidth, the speed of the connection between your brain and your digital… the digital extension of yourself. Particularly output, and, if anything is getting worse, you know, we used to have keyboards that we used a lot, now we do most of our input through our thumbs, on a phone. And, that’s just very slow. A computer can communicate at a trillion bits per second, but your thumb can maybe do maybe 10 bits per second or a hundred if you’re being generous. So, some high bandwidth interface to the brain I think will be something that helps achieve symbiosis, between human and machine intelligence and maybe solves the control problem and the usefulness problem. I’m getting pretty esoteric here, I don’t know is this is…It’s close, we got it. Always you think out of the box. Your ideas are so huge. You want to go to space, you decided to go to space, you did it. You decided that you wanted to land your rocket back, – you failed, 7 times, 8 times? – Yeah, something like that. – Then it landed. – 4 times that I care to count. How do you come with these ideas? Sometimes they are pushing the human limit. You are always pushing the human limit, why?Well, I… I think about what technology solution is necessary in order to achieve that particular goal, and then try to make as much progress in that direction as possible. So, in the case of space flight, the critical breakthrough that’s necessary in space flight, is rapid incomplete reusability of rockets. Just as we have for air crafts. You can imagine that if an aircraft was a single use, almost no one would fly. Because you can buy like, say, 747 might be… 250 million Dollars, 300 million Dollars, something like that. You need two of them for a round trip. But nobody is going to pay millions of Dollars for a ticket to fly. To do air travel. So, but because you can re-use the aircraft tens of thousands of times, the… Air travel becomes much more affordable. And, the same is true of rockets. Our rocket costs… 60 million Dollars, roughly. So, a capital cost if it can be used once in 60 million Dollars. But if the capital cost if it can be used a thousand times is 60 thousand Dollars. So, then if you can carry a lot of people for a flight, then you can get the cost of space flight to be something not far from the cost of air flight. So, it’s truly fundamental, because earth gravity is quite deep. Earth has a fairly high gravity. The difficulty of making a rocket reusable is much greater than the difficulty of making an aircraft reusable. That’s why a fully reusable rocket hasn’t been developed that far. But if you use the most advanced materials, the most advanced design techniques, and you get everything just right, then I’m confident that you can do a fully reusable rocket. Fortunately, if Earth gravity was even 10 per cent stronger, I would say it wouldn’t be impossible.You need a team around you to deliver a lot of ideas. How do you choose your team? Based on what?Well, I suppose honestly that it tends to be a gut feeling more than anything else. So, when I interview somebody, the main questions are always the same. What do you ask? I say: Tell me the story of your life. And, the decisions that you made along the way and why you made them. And then, and also tell me about some of the most difficult problems you worked on and how you solved them. And, that question I think is very important, because… the people that really solved the problem, they know exactly how they solved it. They know the little details. And the people that pretended to solve the problem, they can maybe go one level and then they get stuck.So, what was your biggest challenge in life? Biggest challenge in life? – No challenge?Well, no, there’s a lot of them. I’m trying to sort which is the worst. I think just thinking about how to spend time. One of the biggest challenges I think is making sure you have a corrective feedback loop, and then maintaining that corrective feedback loop over time, even when people won’t to tell you exactly what you want to hear.That’s very difficult. – Yes. Time is over. I’ll ask you just one last question. If you allow me. In the World Government Summit we have so many people from… so many young people actually from across the Globe. If you have an advice to them, young people globally who want to be like Elon Musk. What’s your advice to them?I think that probably they shouldn’t want to be. – You? – I think it sounds better than it is. Okay. Yeah, it’s not as much fun being me as you’d think. – I don’t know. – You don’t think so? It could be worse, for sure. But it’s… I’m not sure I want to be me. Okay. But… You know, I think my advice is if you want to make progress in things, I think that the best analytical framework for, I’ll say in the future is physics. I’d recommend studying the thinking process around physics. Like, not just the equations, the equations are certainly very helpful, but the way of thinking in physics, it’s the best framework for understanding things that are counter–intuitive. And, you know, always take the position that you are to some degree wrong, and your goal is to be less wrong over time. One of the biggest mistakes people generally make and I’m guilty of it too is wishful thinking. You know, like you want something to be true, even if it isn’t true. And so you ignore the things that… You ignore the real truth, because of what you want to be true. This is a very difficult trap to avoid. And like I said, it’s certainly one that I find myself in, having problems with. But, if you just take that approach of that you’re always to some degree wrong and your goal is to be less wrong. And solicit critical feedback, particularly from friends. Like, friends, if somebody loves you they want the best for you. They don’t want to tell you the bad things. So, you have to ask them and say: I do really want to know. And then they will tell you.Thank you very much. It’s been… It’s great for the World Government Summit to have a legend, who’s creating the future for humanity, to share his thoughts, his ideas, his visions, challenges, and his hope for life. Thank you very much.Thanks for having me.”